>> Jason Pamental: Okay, so the way I
set these pages up in part seven is,
I've been sort of adding in
some details with each one.
So we'll start with opening up index-01.
In this one, it's a little basic.
We don't have the shape, we don't really
have a whole lot of differentiation or
scaling going on with the style.
But we do have initial cap,
we have a maximum width on here.
And I wanted to zoom in
on the word flagon, so
we can see that we do not have
any ligatures showing up here.
So let's take a look at that CSS,
and see what's going on.
>> Jason Pamental: So
the things that matter here,
we've got hyphens set to auto,
so we have hyphenation.
But we don't really have anything else,
in terms of refining what's
going on with the paragraphs.
We don't have any scaling going on,
we just have one set size for
the headings,
nothing's really being added to that.
>> Jason Pamental: We do have
a couple things in here.
So I used the section-end pseudo-element
to add that little section divider.
Here's an example of going
into the article-detail,
going to the first paragraph, first line,
that's how we're styling that.
And so this is coming, the,
>> Jason Pamental: It
should be that first paragraph right here.
But I think, all I did was
change it to a typeface that's
not being loaded, that would be why.
So let's see what happens
when we do font-weight,
>> Jason Pamental: There we go,
so this is using Plex, so
it's not a variable font in here.
So I can't specify a number,
I just had to use the keyword there.
But that's something that
will automatically work,
even as things re-wrap,
it's only going to select that first line.
So it's a nice little touch that
you can add to highlight something,
without really having to
add anything in overt.
Likewise, we also have article-detail.
Now, I've scoped this to whatever I
have set as the initial paragraph,
so that way,
I can add that class if I want to.
I could just leave it so
that it's only going to get
the first-of-type:first-letter
in that initial first paragraph.
And that lets us do whatever
we want to style that letter.
And we're floating it to the left,
we're setting some padding,
changing the typeface, setting the font
size, and margin, and line height.
So all of those things
are intended to give us this
effect of getting it
about three stories high.
You can see the alignment isn't
quite what we wanted to be.
That's something that probably needs
to be fiddled with a little bit, but
it's all pretty close.
But it's still just not,
it's not really refined,
it's not getting all the niceties
that we might like to see.
So if we take a look at index-02,
you can see,
this is now bringing in the typeface,
it's gone from Plex to Amstelvar.
And if we take a look,
we still don't have the shape wrapping,
we don't really have too much else.
So here with Plex,
the ligatures are on by default.
So now I can go back, and
I can show you what the CSS looks
like to turn those on or off.
That's what I was trying to find,
to show you, there we go.
See how we have font feature settings,
ligatures and kerning?
So if I,
>> Jason Pamental: Inspect this,
I want to be able to show
you this kind of in-line,
so we can see this a little more easily.
I can disable that, and it's still here,
that's because in the font,
they've encoded it to be on by default.
So instead, what I can do,
if I just didn't want to
have that feature available?
I can force those values to zero, and
see those letters just separated.
So if I toggle that on and off,
you can see the difference.
Some languages don't, like in German,
I guess, they just don't use ligatures.
So there are reasons that you might
want to turn these things on and off.
This has an extended character set that
could be used on a German website,
and it would be inappropriate there.
Because it would be using ligatures where
they are not supposed to be, in German.
So it's important to be able to
know how to control those things.
And this is how,
using font feature settings,
you can force those things to be on or
off.
>> Jason Pamental: So one of
the things that I mentioned earlier,
in terms of discovery, for kind of
figuring out what's available in a given
typeface, and,
>> Jason Pamental: So
my friend, Roel Nieskens, worked on this,
what I wanted to do was
actually grab one of these.
>> Jason Pamental: There we go, so
it's done a little quick analysis.
It's all client-side JavaScript, so
your font file isn't going anywhere.
And it lets me know how many characters
there are, how many different glyphs.
How many layout features,
what's the file size, the format?
And it tells me all of these
things that are available,
these are all OpenType features.
So we've got contextual alternates,
we've got fractions,
ligatures, numerals, and ordinals.
We've got different kinds of alternates,
stylistic sets.
A whole bunch of things that mean a lot
more to type nerds than they do to normal
people, perhaps.
But they are important for
accessing the full range of characters.
The ones that we might typically
use would be things like kerning,
fractions, ligatures.
Being able to set the different
kinds of number styles.
So if you're familiar with
seeing numbers that kind of have
an uneven height,
it's called an old-style numeral.
They're meant to mix in
with mixed-case text.
So numbers in-line look a little bit
nicer, when they have almost an upper and
lowercase ascender or
descender kind of alignment.
That doesn't look so great when
you're trying to line up some stuff
in a financial statement, that's
where you might want tabular figures.
Or if you're having things that are,
maybe a stand-alone,
you want lining figures, that all line up,
but they still have proportional spacing.
Tabular figures are great for financials,
because everything will line up,
it's like a monospace for numerals.
Most of these typefaces actually have
all those number styles available.
You can only access them by
using the OpenType features and
font feature settings.
So this one does have a couple
different number styles.
It has a bunch of stylistic alternates,
and fractions, and ligatures, and
stuff like that.
So it's really nice to be
able to have those features,
not all of them will be on or off,
you might not know they're here.
So using a tool like this,
take any typeface,
drag the font file onto the page, and
it gives you a whole slew of information,
of layout features, type tests.
It lets you see what all of
the alternate characters are in here.
Plex was designed to be used
with IBM all over the world, so
it's a very complete character set.
That's why there's over 700
different characters in
it,
>> Jason Pamental: And
all of these things
are pretty easy to access.
So the fractions would be one that
would be useful in what we're doing.
So if we took a look at this page,
and let's take a look at the text.
And go back into,
>> Jason Pamental: index-plex-rwt,
and let's just go to that first paragraph.
>> Jason Pamental: We'll say
it's a fragrant 1/2 metaphor.
>> Jason Pamental: If we go back,
>> Jason Pamental: And,
>> Jason Pamental: So clearly,
fractions are not on by default, so
let's go take a look at our CSS.
And we go in here and,
>> Jason Pamental: All we do is add that,
go back over here.
And because I had browser sync running,
there's our proper fraction.
We didn't have to do anything else to it,
we just needed to know
the feature was there.
So this is your best friend if
you're making a recipe website,
or if you simply want
your type to look nice.
So knowing those things
there is half the battle.
And then starting to find each of those
little features, and layer them in,
in a way that lets you build
up this typographic system,
in a way that's sustainable.
So imagine this is in a blog,
or WordPress, or Drupal, or
some other content management system.
We're not asking people to add any
classes, just go write a story,
it just works.
The first letter is gonna be a drop-cap,
the first line's gonna be bold.
Any time you put a fraction in there, it's
just gonna get converted automatically.
So it makes it much more sustainable
as a typographic system.
You know that it's going to maintain
its sort of proper look over time.